Welcome to SpecChem's function-specific training on handling, packaging, and shipping DOT-regulated materials. Why this training? Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations requires that any associate who packages, handles, or transports hazardous materials must undergo training every three years regarding the following hazardous materials subjects. Training to provide general awareness and familiarization with various aspects involved with hazardous materials. Training on how hazardous materials are handled in your specific job. Training on safe handling of hazardous materials. Training to make you aware of issues of HAZMAT security. And a more detailed training on maintaining security when dealing with hazardous materials. Your Safety Skills online coursework covered these four areas of training. This course provides training on the requirements and expectations of handling, packaging, and shipping DOT-regulated materials in your work at SpecChem. There are six things you should take away from this video. A basic understanding of what UN-rated packaging is. How you can find information on what packaging to use for specific materials and how to package it. A basic understanding of how to mark hazardous material for shipping. How to locate the proper labels for marking HAZ packaging. Where to find information on the required proper closure of HAZ packaging. And an awareness of the proper tool to use when closing pails, drums, or totes, especially those which contain DOT-regulated materials. First, some general background on UN-rated packaging. You aren't expected to remember all the detailed information, but should become aware of what sets the packaging materials used for DOT-regulated materials apart from standard packaging. UN ratings for packaging were developed so that transporting hazardous materials would be both safer and easier. If a material is DOT-regulated, it must be kept in UN-rated packaging, either for storage or for transport. The rating is multifaceted and is signified by a set of letters and numbers which identify the type of material the container can hold. And which are permanently marked on the container itself. The containers are put through a series of tests to demonstrate they conform to the standards of the UN rating. And enforcement of these regulations is the responsibility of the U.S. Department of Transportation, or DOT. The testing of the packaging containers includes testing to ensure the container can withstand changes in external pressure without failing. Testing to ensure the container won't fail under conditions of internal pressure. Testing to ensure the containers can bear weight for an extended period of time at high temperature without failing. Testing to ensure the containers can withstand the vibrations which occur during transport. And testing to ensure the containers can withstand a freefall drop which may occur during transport. So, when are you required to use UN-rated packaging? UN-rated packaging is required if the material being packaged for transport is an explosive, a non-flammable gas, a flammable gas, a flammable liquid, an infectious substance, a corrosive material, a flammable solid, an oxidizer, an organic peroxide, toxic, or radioactive. At SPEC-CAM, the materials you will be handling which require UN-rated packaging will be mostly flammable liquids, corrosives, and toxic materials. With a couple of oxidizers as well. The most important takeaway from this training is, because UN-rated packaging is designed, tested, and regulated to ensure the safest and most secure shipment and storage of hazardous materials, it is never acceptable to substitute non-UN-rated packaging when working with materials classified as hazardous. There are no exceptions. As a result, you must always pay attention to the type of packaging you are using for any material, so that DOT-regulated materials are packaged in the proper container, and that the container is properly closed. We learned earlier that the DOT has responsibility for ensuring compliance with regulations regarding handling and transporting of hazardous materials. However, it is the responsibility of the shipper to be sure that operations involving DOT-regulated materials are in compliance. This means the packaging used must be authorized, properly manufactured, properly assembled, and properly marked. It is our responsibility, both corporately and individually, to make sure we are purchasing and using the proper packaging, and that the material is properly identified for shipping. Failure to fulfill this responsibility can be costly. Now for your first quiz question. True or false? If you are packaging a DOT-regulated material and find that you do not have enough UN-rated containers to complete the run, you can substitute non-UN-rated containers as long as the number of non-UN-rated pails is less than 10% of the total being packaged. Please mark your answer. Quiz question two. Which of one of the following statements is not true about UN-rated packaging? A. UN ratings are required for the packaging used in shipment and storage of hazardous materials. B. Enforcement of current UN regulations is the responsibility of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, or FBI. C. A UN rating is a set of letters and numbers which specify what the particular container is regulated to hold. D. The packaging should be permanently marked on the bottom and either the side or the top. Please mark your answer. Quiz question three. Which are the three types of DOT-regulated materials most common among materials used in production of SPEC-Chem products? A. Explosives. B. Flammable gas. C. Flammable liquid. D. Infectious substances. E. Corrosives. F. Toxic materials. Please mark your answer. Now we will talk more about UN packaging. As stated previously, the type of material which can be placed in specific UN-rated packaging is indicated by a code number. There are separate codes for liquids and solids, but each has six distinct identifiers which are separated by slashes. We will quickly cover each of the identifiers for liquids since SPEC-Chem DOT-regulated materials are all liquids. You do not need to memorize the details of each identifier. Just knowing what a UN code looks like will help you with identification of the proper packaging. The first identifier tells the package type. For instance, a drum or pail, a barrel, or composite packaging. The material of which the packaging is made. For example, steel, aluminum, or plastic. And whether the container is closed head, made of one piece with separate closures, or open head, which has a removable lid. The second identifier, the packing group level equivalent, signifies the hazard level of the material, either 1, 2, or 3, indicated with Roman numerals. The lower the number, the higher the hazard. Note that a container may hold material classified in its specified packing group and in a lower hazard level group. For instance, an identification code of X is rated for packing group 1, the highest rated level, but may also hold material in packing group 2 or 3. While packaging with identification code Z can only hold materials rated as packing group 3. The second number is the numeric portion, which identifies the maximum allowed specific gravity of the material, which is the ratio of the density compared to the density of water at a specific temperature and pressure. The third identifier displays the hydrostatic pressure to which the container was tested. The fourth identifier indicates the year of manufacture. The fifth identifier is the container's country of origin. Here is a real-world example of a UN rating code taken from the bottom of a pail in the Richmond plant. Reading the code from left to right, we find that this packaging is a drum or pail, in this case a pail, made of steel, is an open head container, which means it requires an open head container. It also requires a UN-rated lid. It can hold materials in packaging groups 2 and 3, with a specific density no greater than 1.9, and has been tested to a pressure of 100 kilopascals. It was manufactured in 2023 in the United States by the C.L. Smith Company. Now we will talk about how to determine if a product requires UN-rated packaging. There are three different sources available to you which have differing additional information also available. First, section 14 of the product SDS will call out that the material is DOT regulated. Also included in that section are the elements which make up the proper marking or labeling of the package. The production order will list the basic description which gives specific information on the type of hazard associated with the product, and indicate the type of UN-rated packaging required. There are also two Excel files on the server, one for drums and one for pails, which show the type of packaging used for all products. With the UN-rated packaging called out, the associated closing instructions for the packaging is also listed in these files. As a further note, know that if the above-mentioned Excel files are moved to a new storage location on the server, or if they are restructured, you will be notified of what has been done and will be trained on how to access and or interpret the new data files. Here is an example of the first source, section 14 of the SDS. We will use Cure and Seal 25EX as our example product. The first statement listed in the first section subheading states, This product is classified per 49 CFR 172.01 by the U.S. Department of Transportation as follows. The information following in that subheading provides the details required for the proper marking of the packaged product, but will not identify the specific packaging required. While you will already know whether your packaging impales drums or toach, you won't necessarily know the color of the container to use, so this method only tells that UN-rated packaging is required, not which UN-rated packaging is required. Still, it is the original identifier of a product's status as DOT regulated. Next, the production order. While you will not necessarily see the production order, you can ask to see it to verify information regarding what you are packaging. If a product on a production order is DOT regulated, the basic description, which is the information required on the package marking, is displayed below the product name and packaging. And the specific packaging container will be indicated as well. In this case, a blue steel UN pail. Again, because the production order is not used as a production floor document, it would not be your best primary source of information. Finally, the computers in your facility should have shortcuts installed on the desktop, which link to a folder containing the Excel file showing the type of packaging used. There is one file for pails and one for drums. Those files will indicate the type of packaging for all products, with an obvious indicator that the UN-rated packaging is required. The proper closing instructions are also listed in these files. Also available, but primarily useful only as a final definitive check, should be a shortcut linking to a folder containing the source documents with the manufacturer's closing instructions for each type of container used. Keeping with our example of using CureNSeal 25, if you would open the Excel file for pails and scroll to CureNSeal 25EX, you would see that CureNSeal 25EX must be packaged in UN-rated blue steel pails. Additionally, the closing instructions for UN-rated blue steel pails is listed. In the Excel file for drums, you would find that CureNSeal 25EX requires UN-rated blue steel drums, and also find the proper closing instructions with the proper drum wrench indicated as well. We'll cover the drum wrench in more detail later. Now for quiz question four. There are three sources for finding out if a SPEC-CHEM product requires UN-rated packaging. Which two of them also show the type of package to use? A. Section 14 of the product SDS. B. The production order. C. An Excel file located on the corporate server.

specific to product packaged in drums or pails, respectively. Please mark your answer. Quiz question 5. Which one of those sources also lists the proper closing instructions for the packaging? A. Section 14 of the product SDS. B. The production order. C. An Excel file located on the corporate server specific to product packaged in drums or pails, respectively. Please mark your answer. Now we will cover information you need to know regarding proper marking for proper storage or transport of DOT regulated materials. First, the proper marking consists of what is called the basic description of the material. The basic description consists of four product characteristics which give quick information on the type of hazard presented by the material. The basic description must be present on all shipping paperwork. It must also be part of all markings on all packages containing DOT regulated materials. As an aid in remembering the four characteristics, think of the acronym I-SHIP. The I stands for the identification number, which is used to identify the specific material or category of chemicals. The S is the proper shipping name, which describes the material's hazard properties and chemical composition. H represents the hazard class. There are nine subdivisions which describe the type of hazard the material presents. Finally, the P stands for the packing group, which is an indicator of the level of danger associated with the material. The lower the number, the greater the associated danger. Returning to section 14 of the SDS for cure and seal 25EX, we already saw that it is a DOT regulated material, so what is the basic description which is printed on the UN label for cure and seal 25EX? In keeping with the I-SHIP acronym, the identification number is UN 1139. The proper shipping name is coding solution. The hazard class is 3 and the packing group is 2. Notice that the SDS listing of the hazard class and the packing group is presented in a slightly different way than is indicated in the basic description. There are specific rules regarding how the basic description must be worded and punctuated. That is not anything you will need to be conversant with and is beyond the scope of this training. Just be aware that the wording in the SDS won't necessarily match the UN label. Finally, the SDS also indicates that the flammable liquid DOT hazard sticker is a required element of the marking. As shown in the previous slide, also required as part of the package marking is the DOT hazard sticker, which is a square sticker using the globally harmonized system or GHS pictograms to depict the type of hazard the material represents. The two stickers you will see most being used at SPEC-Chem will be class 3 flammable liquid sticker and class 8 corrosive sticker, which will be placed on the packaging in the orientation shown here. These stickers are purchased pre-printed on a continuous roll. Your lead or supervisor can show you where to find them for use on packaged hazardous materials. If stock on a hazard sticker appears to be low, notify your supervisor or lead as soon as possible so they can notify the plant manager or assistant plant manager who will then place an order for more. Hazardous materials cannot be shipped without these stickers, so it's important to maintain available inventory. We also mentioned the UN label as being required for HAZ. What's a UN label? Basically, it is the label which is used to mark the packaging of DOT regulated material with the ISHIP information. Again, there are very specific requirements for how the label reads and how the label must also be attached to the packaging in a particular way. UN labels for SPEC-Chem products are printed as needed. The files necessary for printing the labels can be found on the corporate server in the same folder as the product labels themselves. The 49 CFR regulations require the size of the typeface used for the UN ID portion of the label to increase with the capacity of the packaging for the purpose of quick visual capture and understanding. For PAILs, the UN ID number must be no less than 6 millimeters or approximately 0.24 inches, and for drums and totes, it must be a minimum of 12 millimeters or approximately 0.47 inches. The remainder of the basic description contained on the sticker needs only to be clear, readable, and printed in a typeface size which is appropriate for the container. Consequently, the stickers for PAILs will be different than for drums or totes for the same product. For simplicity's sake, there are separate folders on the S-Drive housing stickers for products in drums, in PAILs, and in totes. Putting it all together, we go back to our cure-and-seal 25EX example. On the S-Drive, drilling down through the product folder to the product labels folder, we find a folder named UN numbers. Within that folder, the first three folders will have stickers for drums, PAILs, or totes. Within those folders, the UN stickers are arranged alphabetically by product name. Inside the UN numbers folder for PAILs, we scroll down to find the file named cure-and-seal 25EX. Double-clicking on the cure-and-seal 25EX file will open a PDF file which looks like this. As indicated in the file name for the UN stickers, the document will print 12 stickers per sheet. A few other products will print 10 per sheet, and fewer still will print 6 per sheet. The 12 per sheet stickers use ULINE sticker number S5627, or the Avery equivalent. The 10 per sheet use ULINE sticker S19321, or the Avery equivalent, and the 6 per sheet use ULINE sticker S19322, or the Avery equivalent. You do not need to memorize these sticker numbers. Just note the number of stickers per sheet referenced in the file name, and you will be able to find the sticker sheet you need. Your lead or supervisor can show you where the sticker sheets are kept. In addition, all the information you need to know to print a UN sticker is contained in a document titled printing UN number stickers dot PDF, which is located in the UN numbers folder. When and if the process of printing UN stickers is revised, it will be communicated to you, and the document detailing the process will be updated accordingly. Now that we've printed the UN sticker and located the proper HAZ label, where do you place them on the packaging? For a PAIL, proper placement is to the right of the product label. The diamond-shaped hazard sticker should be placed so it doesn't obscure the SPEC-CHEM logo, and the UN label is placed along the bottom right angled side of the hazard sticker. The hazard sticker and UN label are affixed to drums in a similar fashion to the right of the product label. The hazard label and UN sticker are placed on totes in the same configuration on the side of the tote which displays the product. Quiz question number six. True or false? If you forget to mark PAILs of DOT regulated material with the DOT hazard sticker and or UN label, it's okay to allow to ship as long as you put a note on the shipping paperwork. Please mark your answer now. As our final topic, we will cover the proper closure of packaging containers. Proper closure of packaging is key to preventing the possibility of leaks, so adhering to proper closing instructions is vital when handling DOT regulated materials. Proper closing instructions also apply to and are provided for all packaging containers. Again, proper closure of packaging containers is key to preventing leaks, and since we don't want to ship packaging of any type which may have the possibility of leaking, the proper closings instructions should be followed for all SPEC-CHEM products DOT regulated or not. First, drums. There are several types of drums used for packaging. SPEC-CHEM products. Among them are steel drums with steel bungs, one 2-inch and one 3-quarter inch bung. Steel drums with poly or plastic bungs, one 2-inch and one 3-quarter inch bung. Poly drums with poly bungs, two 2-inch bungs. Each type and size of bung requires a different amount of torque to achieve the proper snug fit closure. For steel drums with steel bungs, the 2-inch bung requires 30 foot-pounds of torque and the 3-quarter inch bung requires 15 foot-pounds. For steel drums with poly bungs, the 2-inch bung requires 20 foot-pounds of torque and the 3-quarter inch bung requires 9 foot-pounds. For poly drums with poly bungs, the 2-inch bungs require 20 foot-pounds of torque. As you can see, 2-inch steel bungs require 30 foot-pounds, 3-quarter inch steel bungs require 15, 2-inch poly bungs require 20 foot-pounds, and 3-quarter inch poly bungs require 9. So how do you achieve the proper amount of torque to close each type and size of bung? By using a properly calibrated torque wrench. The torque wrench works the same way as a rigid handle wrench, except that when the proper torque on the bung is reached, the bung tool will stop rotating while the wrench handle bends. If needed, your lead or supervisor will give you a demonstration of its use. There are two drum wrenches available which will cover all the types of drums used at spec camp. Each wrench has a side which is used to close 2-inch bungs and one to close 3-quarter inch bungs and each is calibrated to address the specific bungs used in packaging spec camp products and drums. First, a red handle drum wrench for steel bungs. The larger 4 lug side is calibrated to 30 foot-pounds and fits the 2-inch steel bung and the single lug side is calibrated to 15 foot-pounds and fits the 3-quarter inch steel bung. A yellow handle drum wrench is available for poly bungs. The larger 4 lug side is calibrated to 20 foot-pounds for the 2 inch poly bung and the single lug side is calibrated to 9 foot-pounds for the 3-quarter inch poly bung. Each wrench handle is also labeled with the calibrated torque values, the owning plant, or in the case of Richmond, the owning department, and the bung material, either steel or plastic. When packaging products classified as HAZ, these are the only tools which may be used to close drums. There are absolutely no exceptions and as stated before, since the closing instructions are the same for non-UN drums, these wrenches should be used for non-HAZ products as well. Now we'll cover the proper closure of pails. There are three steps to properly closing a pail. First, place the uncrimped lid on top of the pail. If it is a spouted lid, be sure the spout is located opposite the product label. The label contains quite a bit of information important to the end-user, so we must properly orient the spout so that the label is not marred by product dripping from the spout. Second, place the crimper over the lid by aligning the 16 lugs on the crimper with the 16 tabs on the lid. Finally, press down on the crimper handles, applying firm and even pressure until the handles reach the end of their motion. It's important to have the lugs and tabs properly aligned so that the length of the lug will crimp the entire length of the tab securely. If the lugs are set over the gap between tabs, the tab will not be fully crimped and the portion of the tab not contacted by the lug may not be set tight enough against the body of the pail, which could allow for seepage or leakage. Now for the proper closure of totes. There is no single torque value to which all tote lids should be tightened. In most cases, the tote used will have been manufactured by Mauser and require 70 foot-pounds of torque. Spec Chem ships very little hazardous material in totes, but when a haz shipment in totes is made, you will need to verify that you are using the proper closing procedures. You can do that by going to the closing instructions folder by way of the shortcut on the desktop of your plant's computer. Within the folder located at S, Operations, Compliance, Closing Instructions is a file named IBC Closing Instructions, totes.pdf, which contains the proper closing torque values listed by the manufacturer. If there are no manufacturer's logos on the tote you are using, ask your plant manager to contact the purchasing lead at home office for guidance. The current closing instructions at the time of this recording, summer of 2024, are shown here. As you can see, there's a wide variance depending on the manufacturer. As stated before, it can generally be assumed that the tote you were using was manufactured by Mauser and requires 70 foot-pounds of torque, but you still should verify that with your lead or supervisor. Executing the proper closing instructions for tote lids requires two tools. These two tools work together as a unit to achieve the proper torque. First is the standard IBC or tote wrench, which is at the bottom of the picture. It is an internally slotted circular ring with handles on opposite sides and a square hole at the center of the frame. Second is a standard 1 1⁄2 inch drive socket torque wrench. To close the tote lid to a specific torque, there are four steps. First, place the tote wrench over the lid. Second, at the base of the handle on the socket wrench, set the dial to the desired torque value. In almost all cases, as stated before, the tote being used is manufactured by Mauser and requires 70 foot-pounds of torque. pounds for proper closure. Third, insert the socket head into the square hole of the tote wrench frame. And fourth, turn the socket wrench until the handle breaks or bends at the socket head without turning the head. Who's question seven? True or false? All drums, whether made of steel or plastic, require the same amount of torque to be considered properly closed. Please mark your answer now. Who's question number eight? True or false? When packaging DOT regulated material in drums, it is never allowable to use a closure tool other than the drum torque wrench specific to the type of bungs used to close the drum. Red for steel bungs and yellow for poly or plastic bungs. Please mark your answer now. As we come to the end of this course, here are the things you've learned. Generated packaging, what it means, what it is, and why it's used. Where to find specific information on the type of pail or drum to use when packaging any liquid product, either UN or non-UN. Proper markings for shipping hazardous material. Where to find information on the required marking for hazardous materials. Where to find closing instructions for each type of packaging. The proper tool to use when closing pails, drums, and totes. Now we will review your quiz. As we go through each question, if you initially marked an incorrect answer, please scratch it out and mark the correct answer. The most important outcome of this training is not a quiz score, but it's having you know the proper procedures in handling hazardous material in your work at Spec Chem. Question one. False. It is never allowable under any circumstance to package hazardous material in non-UN rated packaging. Question two. B. Enforcement of the regulations is actually the responsibility of the Department of Transportation or DOT. Question three. C. Flammable liquid. E. Corrosives. F. Toxic materials. Question four. B. The production order. And C. An Excel file located on the corporate server specific to product packaged in drums or pails respectively. Section 14 of the SDS will note if the product is DOT regulated and give information on how the package should be marked, but it has no information on the proper package to use. Question five. An Excel file located on the corporate server specific to product packaged in drums or pails respectively is the only source among those three which lists the proper closing instructions for packaging. Question six. False. All packages containing hazardous material must be marked properly or they cannot be placed on a truck for shipment. In fact, improperly marked packages containing hazardous material should not even be palletized and stored in the plant as if ready for shipment. If you discover that you have not properly marked some packages, immediately notify your lead, supervisor, plant manager, or assistant plant manager so that the pallets can be removed from the staging or storage lanes and unbanded or unwrapped as soon as possible to prevent them from being loaded on a truck. The package markings should be corrected as soon as possible. Once that is done, the pallets can be returned to the staging or storage lanes on the plant floor. Question seven. False. The amount of torque is different depending on the size of the bung and the type of material of which it is made. Two-inch steel bungs require 30 foot-pounds of torque. Three-quarter inch steel bungs require 15 foot-pounds. Two-inch poly bungs require 20 foot-pounds of torque and three-quarter inch poly bungs require 9 foot-pounds. Question eight. True. Properly calibrated torque wrenches are the only tool allowable for use in closing drums containing DOT regulated material and should also be used for non DOT regulated material to ensure a proper seal on the bungs. Using the proper torque wrench for drum closure is the best defense against potential leakage. Thank you. Please give your signed and dated quiz to your plant manager.